(energetic music)
(keyboard clicks)
Alright, this shouldn't have been too difficult.
I included this challenge
because I wanted you to write the code
to wire up the next and previous fields
when you're adding a node into the list.
So I'm in the employee doubly link list class
and I'm gonna go down to the add before method.
Now there was a comment here
saying return true if you are able
to successfully add the employee into the list
before the existing employee,
and return false if the existing employee
doesn't exist in the list.
Because obviously if the existing employee
doesn't exist, then you don't know where to add
the new employee, so you can't do anything.
Okay, so I'm gonna remove this comment here,
and let's implement our method.
So the first thing we're gonna do is check
whether the list is empty.
Because if it's empty, then we just need to return false,
because obviously the employee that we want to add
the new employee in front of doesn't exist in the list,
so we can't do anything.
So I'm just gonna say, if head equals null, return false.
I could also use if is empty here.
I'm just gonna say if head equals null,
but you could also have said if is empty.
Okay, so if it's not empty, then we have at least
one employee in the list, and so the first thing
we need to do is find the existing employee.
So I'll say find the existing employee.
So I'll say employee node current equals head,
cause we're gonna start looking at the head of the list.
And then while current is not equal to null,
and current isn't the node that we're looking for,
the employee that we're looking for,
so current dot get employee dot equals
the existing employee.
So while current isn't null,
and while current isn't equal to the existing employee,
we're gonna move to the next node.
Current equals current dot get next.
Now when we drop out of this loop,
two things are possible, either current is null,
meaning that the existing employee isn't in the list,
so the employee doesn't actually exist in the list,
or we have found the employee that was passed in
as the existing employee.
So we'll handle the if current equals null case first,
because if current equals null,
we just want to return false.
Cause obviously, if the existing employee,
the one that we want to insert in front of
isn't in the list, we can't do anything.
Alright, so if we get down to this point,
we know that we have found
the existing employee in the list.
So the employee exists in the list
and so we want to insert the new employee
in front of the existing employee.
So what we'll have to do, if we're gonna plop
this new employee in front of an existing employee,
we're gonna have to change four fields.
We're gonna have to obviously set the previous and next
fields of the new employee.
We're gonna have to change the previous field
of the current node, because we're inserting
the new employee in front of the current node,
so we're gonna want the current node's previous field
to point to the new employee,
and then the employee that's currently in front of current
is now going to be in front of the new employee,
so its next field needs to be changed.
So lets start doing that.
So we'll start by setting the new node's
next and previous fields.
So the first we'll do is create a node
for the employee, so we'll say employee node.
New node, equals new employee node,
and that's for the new employee.
And then we'll set the new node's next and previous fields,
so we'll say new node dot set previous,
and this wants to point to whatever the current node's
previous field is pointing to.
Let's say we have Mary Smith and John Doe.
So Mary Smith is in front of John Doe,
and then we come along and we want to insert Bill End
in between Mary Smith and John Doe.
So right now John Doe's previous field
is pointing to Mary Smith.
That's what we want Bill End's previous field
to point to once he's inserted.
And so we want to say new node dot set previous to
whatever the current node is currently pointing to
in its previous field.
And then because we're inserting the new employee
in front of the existing employee,
we want the new employee's next field
to point to the existing employee.
So we're going to say new node dot set next, current.
And that's taken care of setting the new node's
previous and next fields.
Now we also need to set the previous field
of the current node, because in the example I gave
John Doe is no longer going to be pointing to Mary Smith
as previous, he wants to point to Bill End.
So we're gonna say current dot set previous,
and he wants to point to the new node.
And then finally we need to take care
of Mary Smith's next field,
but we need to be careful here.
Because it's possible that John Doe,
if we use him as an example of the existing employee,
let's suppose that the employee that we want to insert
before, that employee might be at the head of the list.
And so we have to handle that special case.
Let's say we say we want to insert Bill End
before Mike Wilson, and Mike is at the head of the list,
we don't have to set the next field
of the node in front of Mike,
because there is no next field.
But what we would have to do is change the head field
to the new employee.
Because if Mike is at the head of the list,
and we're inserting a new employee before Mike,
then the new employee becomes the head of the list.
So we're gonna say, if head equals current,
then what we wanna do is set head to the new node.
We don't have to handle the next field
in whatever was in front of Mike,
because nothing was in front of Mike.
But if Mike isn't the head, then we do have to handle
the next field of the node that was in front
of the current node, and so we'll say,
new node dot get previous dot set next,
and we want to set it to the new node.
So up here we've already set the new node's previous field
to whatever was in front of the employee
that we're inserting in front of.
So in the case of inserting Bill End
between Mary Smith and John Doe,
we already set the new node's previous field to Mary Smith.
So new node dot get previous will be Mary Smith,
and we want to set her next field to the new node,
because instead of pointing to John Doe,
she's now gonna want to point to Bill End.
And so that's what we have to do
to wire up the new node properly
and to change the next field of the node
that's now in front of the new node,
and the previous field of the existing employee.
But we're not quite finished yet,
we have to increment the size.
And we also want change this return false, to return true.
Because if we make it down here,
we were able to successfully insert the new employee
into the list in front of the existing employee.
So let's go over to the main method,
and here, this is the code
that was in the starter project,
so we're adding five employees,
we create our list,
we add Jane, John, Mary, and Mike to the list.
And then we want to add Bill before John Doe.
So let's run this to make sure it works.
Here's the list before we add Bill End,
and we can see that it contains Mike, Mary, John, and Jane.
And then here's the list after we've added Bill End,
and we've called the add before method,
so we want to add him before John Doe,
and we see Mike, Mary, Bill, and then John Doe.
And finally Jane Jones.
So that works.
Let's add an employee before Mike Wilson,
to make sure that we're handling this special case
of the existing employee being the head of the list.
So we'll say list dot add before,
and I'll just make a new employee up on the fly.
(keyboard clicks)
I'll say Someone Else, and we'll give them an ID of 1111,
and we want to have them in front of Mike Wilson,
because he's the front of the list.
And then we'll say list dot print list.
So let's do that.
And we'll see that Someone Else
has been added at the front of the list.
And we still have all the rest of our entries in the list.
So that's it for this challenge,
I think maybe perhaps this special case
might have tripped a couple of you up at first,
but otherwise it's pretty standard stuff.
And as I said, I included this challenge
just to have you the opportunity to go through
having to wire up a node in a doubly linked list.
So that's it for challenge number one,
let's move on to challenge number two.